---
layout: post
title: Long Fuse
---

1. a device in a bomb that controls the timing of an explosion
2. a book by Dr. Eric Haseltine (Long Fuse, Big Bang …)
3. long term goals. not the same as task list items, but each item on the task list should keep the spark going. It's the big picture, the balls you don't drop. It's your marshmallow test. They will not be immediately satisfied. It's not the *here and now*, so you need to be very patient and very cool about it

# On clients and projects

Getting jobs at freelancer, elance odesk or something similar is short fuse. A quick buck. Writing a 500 word article for a measley sum is also short fuse. On the other hand, working on specific expertise, building authoritative credentials on specific subjects, building a brand is long fuse. Working on long fuse projects is disheartening, especially if you are the type that needs constant revalidation and assurances of your efforts. It is easy to dismiss long fuses as risky and fruitless exercise

Worthwhile results have very long gestation periods. It is hard to believe the claims of success stories that an idea came to them while showering. It is more believable that those ideas came to them a long time ago. Marinading at the back of their minds for months, years, maybe decades &mdash; then maybe, just maybe, the last piece of the puzzle came to them one day while they were showering. That I can believe.

Back on the subject of client acquisition vs. project acquisition, having a litany of projects on the portfolio might seem the way to go for a startup effort. I will probably submit that it is one way to bootrap a brand. Having a thousand entries of short projects on the portfolio after 5 years does raise some flags. It gives the impression that the projects you have worked on are low-hanging fruits, can be done in lickety-split and lacks depth. Depth &mdash; 10 miles wide, 2 inch deep, as the saying goes. 


# On building a technical career

Some CVs are 10+ page long and peppered with a dizzying litany of projects &mdash; I have personally seen examples of these CVs &mdash; no, they are not senior developes. I have seen people who had 4 years of experience and have listed more than 50 projects on the CV, spanning 5 or more companies. The details of reasons for the short stints are only mildly interesting. Not worth the discussion. The pattern which explains the short length of stay coupled with the incredible array of projects is more interesting.  

To some, working on a ground up project is a badge of honor. It is. The same cannot be said for working on a startup project then leaving for another project or another company as soon as the project goes on post-production phase. Post-production or support work is ripe with learning opportunities. It is harder and more difficult than the development phase. Time allocation for tasks  are compressed. You don't have a two-week sprint to solve a problem, you have days if not hours. If you made good decisions upstream, then the project has a fighting chance of surviving real-world test. If you did not make excellent decisions, you are in for a bag of hurt. It will be the good kind of hurt. You have to get past bruised egos to appreciate the lessons, but you need to stay with the project past the go-live date to see the lessons.  

Wham-bam short projects may get you a thick CV. It may get you some referrals, to the next short gig. It is one way of building a career. It is however, short-fuse. Would you really hire a tech lead or an architect because he has done a gazillion projects? No. If he (ever) gets hired, it is not because of the number of projects in his belt, but because of how deep he has dived into those projects.









