---

title: Jekyll Setup
author: Ted Hagos
categories: ruby

---

# Setup

Get RVM. This is optional but it's always good to know that Jekyll can be ran on a fixed version of Ruby and not dependent on whatever the OS currently have

`mkdir jekyll-sandbox`  
`cd jekyll-sandbox`  
`rvm use 1.9.3`  
`gem update --system`  
`gem install jekyll`  

# Jekyll Folder Structure and Key files

The top level folders of Jekyll are found below. Some are optional and some are mandatory
-   **root folder:** The folder you created above (jekyll-sandbox) that's the one. When you cd to jekyll-sandbox, that top-level is called a root folder. The file index.html should be located in the root folder. Mandatory

-   **\_posts:** This is the blogging part of Jekyll, if you add a file in this folder, that will be read, parsed and converted by Jekyll into HTML. With the use the *Liquid* templating system, it becomes a breeze to simply loop through all *site.post* and do your formatting. Files inside this folder should have the format ****YYYY-MM-DD-name-of-post.md****. Jekyll uses the date information. Mandatory

-   **\_layouts:** This should contain template files; These files are the cookie cutters of each post (and each page). The template file(s) simply contain the HTML plumbing work and you plug the content of the post using *Liquid's* {{ page.content }} directive, that will inject the post's content into the template. Mandatory

-   **\_includes:** If you want to use **include directive** in jekyll, it will look for the files to include in this folder. Optional

-   **\_site:** When you run `jekyll --server` or simply `jekyll`, this folder will be generated. This is in fact, the resulting HTML files(s) that you can upload to your website. You don't need to create this folder, this will be created automatically when you run the jekyll server

-   **css:** Just for organization, obviously this is where CSS files go. Optional
-   **feed:** Only if you want to create feeds for the posts. Optional.

Get the [basic jekyll project at GitHub](https://github.com/tedhagos/jekyll-base). 

# Local testing

`jekyll --serve`

A development server will run and listen on port 4000
