---

title: Lesson 1
author: Ted Hagos
categories: c

---

# Compiler

Make sure you have a modern C compiler. Linux, UNIX and OSX comes with compilers for C and  C++. Give it a quick test if you really have  a compiler. Get a terminal window and type

`gcc`

or 

`clang`

Either of these two compilers will do.

## OSX

You need to download XCode before you can get the C compilers. So click the **App Store**, login and get XCode. When XCode is done downloading, open it and Go to Preferences. Download the command line tools

## Linux

If the C compiler is not yet installed, just get it via package manager

`sudo apt-get install gcc`

Obviously this package manager is for Debian and the Ubuntus. Use the package manager of your distro if you are using anything other than Debian.

# Hello World

C is a compiled language. Which means you create your source programs by writing it in a source file, usually ending in **.c**, then you convert it to object code or compiled code. This is where you need the **gcc**. 

Some textbooks may still refer to the compiler as **cc** (C Compiler). Just substitute it with **gcc**. GCC stands for Gnu C Compiler. 

Many beginning programmers create the Hello World code as their first program. Don't break tradition. That tradition started sometime in 1969 when Dennis Ritchie and Brian Kernighan used it in their book, *The C Programming Language*. To manage the Hello World exercise, create source file named *hello.c* then put the following code in it

    //filename: hello.c
    
    #include<stdio.h>
    #include<stdlib.h>
    
    int main() {
      printf("Hello World\n");
      return EXIT_SUCCESS;
    }

compile the above code using gcc. On  a terminal window, type

`gcc hello.c`

If you managed to type example code above without errors, you should compile without errors too. The compiler will produce the file *a.out*. Run the program with the command

`./a.out`

## Compiler options

GCC has a lot of compiler options. One of them allows you to specify the output filename so that it reads something other than *a.out*. So compile your code again, this time using the command below

`gcc hello.c -o hello`  
`hello`

The  `-o` flag of gcc means *output filename*
