---

title: Casting
author: Ted Hagos
categories: java

---


You already know what **upcasting** is, we discussed that not too long ago. Upcasting happens when you assign a narrow type to a wider type e.g. an **int** value assigned to a **long**. Java does for you automatically, no intervention needed. The opposite of **upcasting** is of course, well, **downcasting** &mdash; not very creative, I know, but it makes the two terms easier to remember. 

Downcasting happens when you force a wider type into a narrow type e.g. try to assign an **int** to a **byte**, the compiler won't let you. Unlike upcasting, downcasting is an explicit activity. It needs action from the programmer. 

Let's go back to the byte arithmetic example of Fig 4. We solved that by making variable **c** a int. We also could have solved that problem using downcasting.

    class ByteAdd {
      public static void main(String args[]) {
        byte a = 1;
        byte b = 2;
        byte c = (byte)(a + b);
      }
    }

The cast operator is the pair of parentheses. We are forcing the value to the right of the cast operator, in this case `(a + b)` which is a **int** to become a **byte**. You have to group expression **a + b** because if you did not, only the value **a** would have been casted to a byte, then the addition operation would be performed (which results to an int) then it will be assigned to **c** &mdash; the cast operator has a higher precedence than the addition operation, that is why you need to group.
