---
title: jquery basics
tags:
- javascript
- 

---

JQuery is pretty good at a lot of things, the most usage though is DOM selection and manipulation and event handling. To get it going, we simply include it in a page using the **\<script\>** tag. First, you need to download it from [JQuery's home page](https://jquery.com). Save it somewhere inside the docroot of your web project. Then reference it from the **\<script\>** tag.

~~~
<head>
  <script src="js/jquery-1.11.2.js"></script>
</head>
~~~

In the example above, the JQuery js file is stored inside the **js** folder and the html page is on the top folder of docroot, hence we need to reference the js file relative to the location of the webpage that is defining the inclusion of the jquery library.

Alternatively, you can include jquery in your webpage by loading it using a CDN, a content delivery network. 

~~~
<script src="//code.jquery.com/jquery-1.11.2.min.js"></script>
~~~


# Basic Usage

Before doing anything on the DOM, you need to make sure that all DOM elements have already been loaded and rendered. This is why our JQuery codes will look like this

~~~
<script>
$(document).ready(function(){
  // DOM manipulation and other codes here .
});
</script>
~~~ 

Before JQuery, your code might have looked like this

~~~
<script>
body.onload = function(){
  // DOM manipulation and other codes here .
}
</script>
~~~

You can use JQuery as a drop-in replacement for these kinds of codes.

# Hunting for elements

In traditional javascript, we used codes like 

`var b = document.getElementById('btnLogin');`

in order to get a programmatic reference to an html element with an **id=btnLogin**. To do the same task in jquery, we will use codes like this

`var b = $("#btnLogin");`

JQuery uses CSS like syntax. That is why there is a pound/sharp sign before **btnLogin**. If you have constructed CSS files before, the jquery syntax for element ids and names will be familiar to you. 

# Common Usage


~~~
<body>
<button id="btnLogin">Login</button>
<script>

$(document).ready(function(){
  // get a DOM reference to the login button 
  var blogin = $("#btnlogin");
  blogin.click(function(){
    alert("Button click");
  });

  // detect browser type
  
});

</script>
</body>
~~~

# Binding events



# References



